---
title: Some Life Lessons
date: 22<sup>nd</sup> April, 2025
aboutMe: A couple life lessons learnt recently.
---

# Context
As of writing this, I am a II PUC or 12th standard student, preparing for 
[JEE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_Entrance_Examination). Of course, this is the common rat race every 
single student wants to go for; JEE(Engineering) or NEET(Medical). I _want_ to go for a different field - **Science 
research**. Along with this, my [CET](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Entrance_Test) exam had just finished
and my cousins had come over for a couple days. So with all of them talking about the future - I have 2 elder cousins,
both of whom went for Engineering. Almost everyone in my family has studied engineering, or wants to. So, I don't have
many people, who I know, who have chosen science as a career. The Sunday they all left, it gave me some time to self
reflect; to think about the future. I had also recently read the book 
[The Silent Patient](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Silent_Patient), which was gifted to me by my elder cousin.

# The Confusion

Why enginnering or Why science? It is a decision that has to be made in less than, at most, 3 months. I think this was
also a reason - the deadline.

There are many pros and cons to science and engineering both. I shall make a non-exhaustive list of the same here, 
and update it.

# The Lessons

I had a talk with my parents about this; that very night, and it was, to say the least, mind-opening. Here are some 
of the major points that I remember.

### Why I was feeling low
Initially, I really had no idea why I was feeling low. All I knew is I felt sad. It took some talking and thinking over 
it to realize that it was mainly because I was scared of the future; No one knows what the future holds for us. 
It must have been the combined effect of all relatives asking about the future; what will I be doing next, what will
I be working for, what job I'll get, what college/institute I'll get, etc; All of them talking about engineering, 
and their jobs; the joy of meeting so many people, the fun in those three days had suddenly disappeared. I was just left
with my own thoughts, and I had quite a lot to think upon.

Previously, over the last two years, as I was preparing for the JEE exam(and other related ones too), I was more or less
fixed upon the fact that I _wanted_ to do research. I genuinely enjoyed solving physics problems, regardless of how 
physically impossible they may be. I have in fact, compiled the majority of those questions in this website 
[here](../puques/index.html). But, the major drawback of this career is that many people don't know about this. 
So, there are not many people to ask about. 

Engineering, on the other hand, is straightforward: remember a bunch of stuff for 4 years, get placed in a good 
company for a good salary, work there, and your career is more or less 
fixed. There is nothing more to achieve(other than salary hikes, etc). I don't want to work for stuff like that.
Don't get me wrong, I enjoy software coding, etc. I have made this website more or less from scratch; Really love some
open source projects(I use [Helix Editor](https://github.com/helix-editor/helix)), designed my own CLI
[jrnl](https://kajuburfi.github.io/jrnl) in rust, made some physics simulations that were calculation intensive, etc.
I just don't think that I would _like_ to work for some project in some company. I **want** to enjoy what I work on, 
instead of trying to enjoy what I work on.

Its just a lot to think about at once, and it's easy to get overwhelmed doing so. 

### Your career is not decided overnight

Joining an Engineering course does not mean that you'll be working in an engineering job. 
Joining a research course ([IISER](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indian_Institutes_of_Science_Education_and_Research)s), 
does not automatically mean that you'll get a PhD, and work as a researcher. This is a necessary thing to understand. 
My parents gave so many examples of this within our friends and family.

### People will talk

Since most of my relatives were talking about such things, it had come onto my mind. It is easy to go with the flow
and just take in everything someone says. But we should be aware of some things - people try to impose their thoughts
on you - Why not do engineering? Just 4 years, and then you'll get placed nicely. - and so on. And, when many 
people starting talking about the same thing, it starts to make you think: Why do I want to do research?
All people care about is your _package_ - How much money you start making straight out of college. 

### FOMO

If I do indeed choose to go for a research course at IISER, the nearest ones would be at Pune, Thiruvananthapuram or 
Tirupati. All of them have a travel time from home of around 10 hours. Going there would mean missing out on family
gatherings like this; and there's nothing you can do. It's not worth travelling a day, just to stay for 1 day and then
leave again(short meetings). 

Life is just an intricate balance between career and family. And it does come to a point where you must choose one over
the other. And this might also have been a factor contributing to my sadness.

### There are things out of your control

Some things that are out of your control are obvious, the weather is an example. Other things are not so evident.
Some people, even though they know that something is wrong, continue to do it. An example would be smoking.
You might be able to tell them about the dangers, but at the end of the day, it is their choice. And you cannot change
that. Another thing out of your control may be some behavioural traits of a person. 

We must recognize these aspects and note that they are out of our control. And once you realize that there is not much
you can do about it, why even try? Of course, you should _try_ to convince them, but if it doesn't work, trying more
times just doesn't help anyone. 

### Not everyone can sympathize

It may feel obvious to you that another person should be able to understand your feelings. After all, how hard can it
be? However, some people just cannot do so. Others don't even try. This is another thing that is out of your control.
Just let it be, and live life as usual.

# In a nutshell...

I think it was good to have felt _sad_ that day. It made my think, and talk, and we got a bunch of lessons to learn
from it, which otherwise might not have come up. 
