---
title: Allergies
date: 21<sup>st</sup> April, 2025
aboutMe: I recently learned about my allergies...
---

# Allergies, what are they?

When your body detects a foriegn item entering, it might mistake it to be harmful, called an _allergen_. This causes
your body to have an _allergic reaction_ to it, which might be just irritable(like itching/rashes), or something
more severe(like _anaphylaxis_). There are a variety of things that may cause an allergy.

Most allergies(like milk, nuts, etc) develop within 6-8 months after being born. Some others, your body may become 
allergic after a while. Some of the reactions may occur only when something else is also happening at the same time
(such other things are called _co-factors_). 

# What have I got?

I mainly have an allergy to a specific protein called _profilin_. It is mainly present in some seafoods(like oyster), 
and also in melons. But I have eaten melons before, so the doctor said it might have been a cross-contamination. 
I am also allergic to certain types of pollen, mainly found in the West, which also majorly contain _profilin_.
Another item that contains _profilin_ is latex. So I must avoid latex gloves, and request any doctor (during checkups)
to avoid the same. Alternatives are nitrile or vinyl gloves.

Previously I had known that I had an allergy to _Amoxicillin_, which belongs to the Penicillin class. I had gotten
rashes for a month the last(and only) time I had taken _Amoxicillin_. 

The reaction that occurs is called _anaphyalxis_. According to my doctor, what I have is not very severe, since only
one "system" is reacting - I feel drowsy and feverish for about 5 min, and then I'm back to normal. I don't have any
rashes nor foaming near the mouth nor becoming unconscious. 

The doctor has advised me to avoid seafood. Melons are okay, since I have eaten them before, and there is no reaction 
to it. She has given an emergency Epinephrine/Adrenaline injection, which is to injected in a severe case. The 
injection has to stored in the fridge(not freezer), and has a shelf life of 6 months. We can also use an Epi-pen, but
those are unnecessarily expensive(over Rs 10,000 compared to Rs.250). In slightly less intense reactions, 
I have to take a pill(_levocet_ and _ivepred_), which are anti-histamines. They have a shelf life of around 3 years.

# Conclusion

Everyone has allergies. It's better to know them, and avoid them, rather than to experience it.

